Still no news on results of Russian food safety inspections at Latvian fish canneries RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - No word has yet been received from the Russian Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance (Rosselkhoznadzor) regarding the results of the recent food safety inspections at Latvian fish canneries.
As LETA was informed by Latvian Food and Veterinary Service spokeswoman Ilze Meistere, no information has yet been received from Rosselkhoznadzor regarding the results of the inspections.
As reported, inspectors from Rosselkhoznadzor in July completed their visit to Latvia to inspect Latvian fish canneries and producers of animal fodder certified for exports to Russia.
According to the information from the Latvian Food and Veterinary Service, a group of Russian inspectors conducted inspections at five Latvian fish canneries - Karavela, Bankis, Unda, Sabiedriba IMS and Gamma A - to check their compliance with the requirements of the Eurasian Economic Union member states, including Russia.
Latvian officials hope that, should the Rosselkhoznadzor report be positive, talks may be reopened about resuming export of Latvian fish products to Russia.
Set in Vilnius in 1989, the final year of Soviet rule, teenage friends resolve to "live each day as if it were your last" in a group they call Seneca's Fellowship, named after the famous Roman philosopher.
A quarter of a century later, with disillusionment haunting his apparently successful life, one member of the group feels he has betrayed his youthful ideals and delves into a Pandora's box of memories.
Produced by Lithuania's Studio Uljana Kim, Estonia's Amrion and Latvia's Locomotive Productions, the film, which was supported by state film funds in each country as well as Eurimages, stars Dainius Gavenonis, Marijus Mazunas, Elzbieta Latenaite and Ina Marija Bartaite.
The Latvian premiere for the film will be on October 11 as part of the Lielais Kristaps national film festival.
New Latvian ambassador to Belgium presents her credentials to King Philippe RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - Today, the new Latvian Ambassador to Belgium Ilze Ruse presented her letters of credence to His Majesty King Philippe of Belgium, LETA was informed by the Foreign Ministry.
In a conversation with the ambassador, the King emphasized the close relationship between Latvia and Belgium, including at the regional level, and good cooperation in international organizations.
Ambassador Ruse stressed that Belgium is an important partner to Latvia both on a bilateral basis, in the format of the Baltic-Benelux cooperation, and in the Euro-Atlantic structures.
The ambassador also offered thanks for support provided by Belgium for air policing in the Baltic states and highlighted the potential of cooperation between the Baltic states and the Benelux region.
Since then, she has also been active in the academic sector.
Ruse will reside in The Hague, Netherlands.
Public procurement bill will not be reviewed as urgent RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - Saeima Economic, Agricultural, Environmental and Regional Policy Committee decided today that the new Public Procurement Law would not be reviewed as urgent - which is what the government had asked Saeima to do, but as any other regular bill, in three readings.
MPs agreed that many proposals should be expected regarding the draft law, from both local governments and non-governmental organizations.
However, for review of the bill to proceed faster, the Economic Committee decided it would ask that the bill be included on the agenda of Saeima meeting tomorrow, September 15.
In the current version of the law, this figure is EUR 4,000.
Solidarity in tackling refugee crisis must be voluntary and can not be forced upon countries - Juncker STRASBOURG, Sept 14 (LETA) - Solidarity in tackling the refugee crisis must be voluntary and can not be forced upon countries, European Commission head Jean-Claude Juncker said in his annual State of the Union speech on Wednesday.
Juncker said that solidarity in the refugee crisis must"come from the heart".
At the same time, Juncker pointed out to the necessity to secure the EU's borders, with stricter border controls and registering all those crossing the border.
"We do n't have a permanent structure and without that, we are not able to work efficiently and so we must have a European HQ and... work towards a common military force," Juncker told the European Parliament in his annual State of the Union address.
Juncker stressed that post-Brexit, the EU's remaining 27 member states had to stick together and that included taking on increased responsibility for their defense.
"We can no longer depend on the power of individual member states and together we have to make sure we protect our interests," he told MEPs.
Twenty-two of the EU's 28 member states are also members of the U.S.-led NATO alliance, headquartered in Brussels, but Juncker insisted the bloc's military ambitions would not undercut this key relationship.
"This should be complementary with NATO - more European defense does not mean less transatlantic solidarity," he said.
Rinkevics sends letter to Murniece urging MPs not to participate as Russian election observers in Crimea and Sevastopol RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - In a letter to Saeima Speaker Inara Murniece (National Alliance), Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkevics (Unity) calls on MPs to take into account Latvia's official position, meaning that they should not participate as election observers in the Russian Duma election in Crimea and Sevastopol, which is in contradiction with Ukrainian legislation.
According to the letter made available to LETA, the minister reminds that Russia is having its State Duma elections on September 18, and that voting is also being organized in the illegally occupied Ukrainian territories of Crimea and Sevastopol.
''In this situation, I wish to point out that the organization of the Russian Duma elections in Crimea and Sevastopol is illegal," the foreign minister said in the letter.
First pilot train from China to Latvia expected by the end of the year - Augulis RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - The first pilot train of goods from China to Latvia is expected by the end of the year, Transport Minister Uldis Augulis (Greens/Farmers) said during a conference today titled Global Transportation Vision organized by the Latvian national rail company Latvijas Dzelzcels.
He also emphasized that challenges still remain regarding cooperation with other countries, as well as business partners in the transportation sector.
Our geographic position as a EU country bordering Russia and Belarus make us a natural bridge, connecting east and west, north and south.
That is why Latvia, with its well developed transportation infrastructure, three year-round ports, modern logistics and distributions centers is interesting to many in Asia, Russia, the Commonwealth of Independent States, Western Europe, Northern Europe and the Black Sea region," Augulis said.
He said that taking into account global processes and Latvia's place in the world, it is important to have successful cooperation with China.
This common tariff is the first step to developing a complete uniform offer for the transit corridor from China to Scandinavia via Latvia.
Number of needy residents in Riga down 19% since last year RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - The number of Riga residents living below the poverty line has reduced by 19 percent or 1,702 persons since August of last year, LETA was informed by Riga City Council Welfare Department spokeswoman Lita Brice.
Brice informed there was also a six percent reduction in the number of persons receiving social benefits - from 10,979 in July to 10,366 in August.
Meanwhile, when compared to the first eight months of last year, the number of persons receiving social benefits in the first eight months of this year has reduced by 31 percent.
I am confident that we are," he said.
At the same time, the prime minister emphasized that Latvijas Dzelzcels can not stand aside in this project, and must assist in all ways possible to implement it.
As reported, on September 7 representatives of the three Baltic states at the meeting of the RB Rail supervisory board agreed on the further procurement model and responsibilities in implementation the Rail Baltica project.
Purchases will be divided into three categories - purchases organized solely by RB Rail, consolidated purchases organized by the joint venture and purchases organized at the national level under strict supervision from the joint venture.
The Latvian Transport Ministry reported that the meeting was a turning point in cooperation among the Baltic states to continue work on the project.
As LETA was informed by State Chancellery spokeswoman Lita Juberte-Krumina, during the meeting Kucinskis pointed out that relations between the two countries are good and that"we see much prospective in expanding the political dialogue and economic cooperation".
At the same time, Kucinskis also expressed hope that India will open up an embassy in Latvia in the near future.
We have also been certified to begin exporting dairy products to India, which will certainly benefit local dairy producers and the Latvian food sector as a whole.
He emphasized that he sees the opportunity to expand cooperation in such areas as food production, pharmaceuticals, information and communication technology, green-technologies and logistics.
Both sides were in agreement that there is much potential in the development of bilateral relations between Latvia and India.
Latvia shows EU's seventh steepest rise in industrial production in July - Eurostat LUXEMBOURG, Sept 14 (LETA) - In July 2016, Latvia showed the seventh steepest industrial production growth in the European Union (EU) against the seventh month of last year, according to Eurostat's data on 25 the bloc's member states.
Of the EU members reporting their data, only Denmark and Slovenia (+7.4 percent each), Finland (+6.8 percent), Ireland (+5 percent), Greece (+4.1 percent) and Luxembourg (+3.7 percent) showed an even steeper rise in industrial production.
Industrial production in Estonia in July was 2.2 percent greater when compared to the same month last year.
Over the past year, industrial production increased in 14 EU member states, while 11 countries reported a decline.
Industrial production slowed most in Slovakia - minus 14.3 percent, followed by the Czech Republic - minus 7.6 percent and Malta - minus 3.9 percent.
LI movement # GribuTeviAtpakal receives support from entrepreneurs RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - The Latvian Institute (LI) has received support from entrepreneurs for its social movement hashtagged # GribuTeviAtpakal (Want You Back), as they are interested in new methods to employ young people, LI director Aiva Rozenberga told LETA in an interview.
Rozenberga said that the topic was discussed by the LI and the Employers' Confederation of Latvia at the beginning of September.
Rozenberga also said that several employers of the IT and the service sector contacted the LI indicating that they can already provide employees with good jobs, high salaries, positive attitude, and a European approach, but finding workers is hard.
"We have read that other fields, such as construction, also lack employees.
However, the non-governmental sector searching for various cooperation opportunities is very active," the LI director said adding that the institute is meeting with various experts, including those of communication and psychology.
"One could say that this is a matter of the nation's psychology.
The LI believes that it is time to express our wish to have our compatriots return to Latvia once they are ready, but for now to maintain stronger connections with Latvia.
Criminal process on Slokenbeka Lake pollution forwarded to prosecutor's office RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - The State Police have forwarded to the prosecutor's office a criminal case on Slokenbeka Lake and Slocene River pollution last summer, as the State Police told LETA. The criminal process was handed over to the prosecutor's office this past August.
As reported, the criminal case deals with drainage of filthy sewage into Slokenbeka Lake and Slocene River, as a result of which thousands of fish were killed.
The amount of damage caused to the state and nature is estimated at over EUR 9,000.
Kenins notches two assists to help ZSC Lions beat Zug BERN, Sept 14 (LETA) - Ronalds Kenins had two assists in Switzerland's National League A (NLA) match last night, yet his ZSC Lions lost to Zug 2:3 (0:1, 1:1, 1:1).
In the meantime, Latvian goalie Elvis Merzlikins helped his Lugano defeat Fribourg-Gotteron 3:1 (0:1, 1:0, 2:0).
On the other hand, Ivars Punnenovs' Langnau Tigers lost to Geneva Servette 2:3 (0:0, 0:2, 2:0, 0:1).
Salmonellosis ascertained at several kindergartens where catering services are provided by Kindercatering RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - The Disease Prevention and Control Center has found salmonella in eight out of 27 schools where catering services are provided by the Kindercatering company, as the center's representative Ilze Araja told LETA. All eight are preschools.
Investigation is ongoing, and the center could inform about the results sometime next week.
According to Firmas.lv, Kindercatering, founded in 2012, posted EUR 69,109 in turnover and earned EUR 1,709 in profit last year.
The company belongs to Ieva Fridenberga-Kalnina, its share capital is EUR 1.
Vejonis hopes Italy will join Canadian-led NATO battalion in Latvia RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - During a meeting today with Italian President Sergio Mattarella, Latvian President Raimonds Vejonis expressed hope that Italy will join the Canadian-led multinational NATO battalion which will be deployed to Latvia.
As LETA was informed by the Presidential Press Service, during the meeting, the two sides praised their cooperation on security matters, which is important in implementing the decisions made during the recent NATO Summit in Warsaw.
The president also extended an invitation to the Italian president to visit Latvia in 2018, when the country will be celebrating its centennial anniversary.
At the same time, Vejonis pointed out that this is a very important year in Latvian-Italian relations, as it marks 25 years since diplomatic relations were re-established between the two countries.
Latvian Football Federation supported Michael van Praag's candidacy in UEFA president vote ATHENS, Sept 14 (LETA) - The Latvian Football Federation supported the failed candidacy of Dutch football association chief Michael van Praag in today's UEFA president, LETA was informed by LFF general-secretary Janis Mezeckis.
We have also formed good cooperation with him," said Mezeckis, who congratulated the winner Aleksander Ceferin on his appointment.
''We have known van Praag quite longer than Ceferin - over 20 years now.
Furthermore, he has also visited Latvia .""Both presentations and programs were good.
I do not personally know Ceferin all that well.
However, he will bring breath of fresh air into UEFA, as he himself is young and educated in law," Mezeckis added.
Foreign Ministry postpones idea of opening up embassy in Brazil RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - Due to various reasons, the Foreign Ministry is postponing the idea of opening up an embassy in Brazil at the moment, Foreign Minister Edgars Rinkevics (Unity) confirmed during a Saeima Foreign Affairs Committee meeting today.
Speaking about the ministry's finances and budget, the minister said that"due to various reasons" the idea to open up an embassy in Brazil has been postponed for now.
In its place, the Foreign Ministry is planning on strengthening the work of Latvian diplomatic missions in priority countries, where there is greater political, economic and diaspora interests.
Little has been done the past several years to stimulate the economy - Rimsevics RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - In an interview on Latvian Radio today, Bank of Latvia President Ilmars Rimsevics said that little has been done the past five years to stimulate the economy.
''Little has been done the past five years to heat-up for the economy.
However, much has been done to make sure crediting of the national economy has not been revived, much has also been done to halt investment projects, and in the past two years nothing has been done so that the flow of structural funding can be felt in this system.
As reported, the Bank of Latvia in September reduced Latvia's economic growth forecast for this year from two percent to 1.4 percent.
Without the euro the situation in Latvia's economy would be much more dramatic at the moment - Rimsevics RIGA, Sept 14 (LETA) - Without the euro, Latvia's economic situation would be much more dramatic at the moment, Bank of Latvia President Ilmars Rimsevics told Latvian Radio today.
He also said that in order to explain in detail the benefits the euro has on Latvia's economy, he would need at least another hour.
As reported, Latvia joined the eurozone on January 1, 2014.
In a meeting after the official ceremony of accreditation, the president and the ambassador reviewed bilateral cooperation between both countries – the active political dialogue and opportunities for reinforcing economic and cultural relations.
As the issues of regional security were discussed, Henins noted Hungary’s contribution to ensuring the security of the Baltic States by taking part in NATO’s air policing mission.
The president of Hungary wished the ambassador success in his further endeavours of building cooperation between both countries.
Following the submission of credentials and a conversation with the Hungarian president, the ambassador laid a wreath at the Millennium Memorial (Hosök tere) in the Heroes’ Square in Budapest.
Bergmanis thanks Canada for its decision to lead multinational battalion in Latvia RIGA, Sept 15 (LETA) - During a meeting on Wednesday with the Canadian Chief of Defense General Jonathan Vance, Latvian Defense Minister Raimonds Bergmanis (Greens/Farmers) said that Latvia is thankful to Canada for its decision to lead the multinational NATO battalion in Latvia.
''We are very thankful to Canada for its decision to lead the multinational NATO battalion in Latvia.
We highly value your contributions to the alliance, especially in the security of our region.
The decisions made at the Warsaw Summit are historical for our country and our region," Bergmanis emphasized.
''We have always been and will continue to be a trustworthy ally for Latvia, and in such a way we once again demonstrate this to the whole world.